LATIN AMERICAN LITERATURE
OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
WAS FORGED DURING AN ERA
OF TUMULT AND CHANGE.
INDEPENDENT COUNTRIES
EMERGED FROM THE
FORMER COLONIES
OF THE NEW WORLD,
AND THE VOICE OF THE
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
- VIOLENTLY REPRESSED
THROUGH THE COURSE
OF THE CONQUEST - BEGAN
TO REASSERT ITSELF
IN THE CULTURAL DIALOG
OF THE CONTINENT.
THE PROCESS OF ACHIEVING
INDEPENDENCE WAS COMPLEX
AND FRAUGHT WITH BOTH
POLITICS AND SYMBOLISM
AS LATIN AMERICA
TOOK ON THE TASK
OF GRAPPLING
WITH ITS PAST.
UTOPIAN VISIONS OF THE
FUTURE CO-MINGLED WITH
FRANK ASSESSMENTS OF
THE PAST, AND THE NEWLY
DEFINED POPULATIONS OF
THIS CONTINUALLY EVOLVING
CONTINENT SET ABOUT
CREATING A LANGUAGE
AND A LITERATURE THAT
WERE NEW, LOCAL,
AND UTTERLY
THEIR OWN.
*
IT'S NOT SURPRISING THAT
WHEN THE MAJOR AESTHETIC
MOVEMENTS OF NINETEENTH
CENTURY EUROPE
- ROMANTICISM, REALISM,
AND NATURALISM -
MADE THEIR WAY ACROSS
THE OCEAN, THE NEW WORLD
INTERPRETED THEM IN
ENTIRELY NEW WAYS.
WHILE ENORMOUSLY
INFLUENTIAL,
THESE MOVEMENTS
LANDED IN A VIBRANT
CULTURAL MILIEU WITH
ITS OWN HISTORY.
IN LATIN AMERICA THE
CLEAR-CUT LINES OF
DEMARCATION BETWEEN
ROMANTICISM, REALISM,
AND NATURALISM
BECAME BLURRED AND,
IN SOME CASES,
IRRELEVANT.
IN THE LITERATURE OF THIS
PERIOD, INSPIRATION FLOWED
FROM THE SAME SOURCES THAT
FED THE EMERGING LOCAL AND
CONTINENTAL IDENTITIES
- IDENTITIES WHICH,
WHILE NEVER
COMPLETELY HARMONIOUS,
WERE ALWAYS DISTINCT
AND COMPELLING.
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
1800'S, THE GENRE THAT HAD
DOMINATED ALL OF LATIN
AMERICA LITERATURE WAS,
WITHOUT QUESTION,
THE NOVEL.
BASED ON THE ROMANTIC
MODEL AND ON THE
MYRIAD ACCOUNTS THAT
CHRONICLED THE CONQUEST,
THE LATIN AMERICAN
NOVEL OF THIS PERIOD
BROUGHT TOGETHER
HISTORY AND LITERATURE
IN A SYNTHESIS THAT OWED AS
MUCH TO SIR WALTER SCOTT
AS IT DID TO
ROMANTIC NOTIONS
OF NATION, HISTORY,
AND SUBJECTIVITY.
AND WHILE LATIN AMERICAN
NOVELS UNDOUBTEDLY
MIRRORED THE INFLUENCE OF
IMPORTED EUROPEAN AESTHETICS,
THAT REFLECTION WAS
OFTEN SO DISTORTED,
REFINED, AND ADAPTED BY
NEW WORLD SENSIBILITIES
AS TO BE VIRTUALLY
UNRECOGNIZABLE
TO OLD WORLD ARTISTS.
IN THIS CONTEXT, THERE
AROSE NARRATIVES
THAT WOULD PROVE TO BE
CRUCIALLY IMPORTANT
NOT ONLY
AESTHETICALLY,
BUT IDEOLOGICALLY AND
POLITICALLY AS WELL.
IN THEM, LOCAL HISTORY
AND FICTION INTERTWINE,
CREATING TALES THAT FORM
THE IDEA OF NATIONHOOD,
A CRUCIAL STEP IN THE
POST-INDEPENDENCE PROCESS.
WHEN ONE THINKS OF THE
EMERGENCE OF THE NOVEL
IN LATIN AMERICA IN THE
1800'S, IT IS GENERALLY
ASSOCIATED WITH THE
ISSUE OF NATIONHOOD,
OF BECOMING A NATION.
HOWEVER, IF WE
LOOK AT SOME CASES
THAT WE MIGHT
CALL "LOCAL",
WE SEE IMPORTANT
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THEM
WHEN CONSIDERING
THE EMERGENCE
OF THE NOVEL GENRE.
AMONG THE CLASSIC
FOUNDATIONAL TALES ARE
AMALIA BY
JOSE MARMOL,
SAB BY GERTRUDIS
GOMEZ DE AVELLANEDA,
MARIA BY
JORGE ISAACS,
ENRIQUILLO BY
MANUEL JESUS GALVAN,
AND MARTIN RIVAS BY
ALBERTO BLEST GANA.
BEFORE, THE
CRITICS WOULD SAY,
SURE MARTIN RIVAS IS
A SENTIMENTAL NOVEL,
BUT THERE'S MORE
TO IT THAN THAT.
LET'S TALK ABOUT ITS MOST
OBVIOUS CHARACTERISTIC.
IT'S A
SENTIMENTAL NOVEL.
IT MAKES YOU THINK,
FEEL, BREATHE,
LISTEN TO YOUR HEARTBEAT
IN A DIFFERENT WAY.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
PHENOMENON AS A WHOLE...
AND IT OCCURS
BETWEEN 1850 AND 1880.
OVER THE SPAN OF
ONE GENERATION.
DEMOCRACY THEN HAD A WIDE
RANGE OF POSSIBILITIES.
PEOPLE WERE ABLE
TO IMAGINE,
OR AT LEAST LONG FOR,
RELATIONSHIPS BASED ON
EQUALITY, MUTUAL
DEPENDENCY,
AS OPPOSED TO THOSE BASED
ON ABUSING THE OTHER PERSON.
THE TRADITION OF THE
SENTIMENTAL NOVEL REACHES
BACK TO PRE-ROMANTIC
ANTECEDENTS SUCH AS
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU, WHO
DESCRIBED THE FUNDAMENTAL
DIVIDE BETWEEN SOCIETY AND
HUMAN NATURE, AND TO THE
ROMANTICISM OF JOHANN
WOLFGANG GOETHE'S NOVEL
THE SORROWS OF
YOUNG WERTHER.
THESE WRITERS EMPHASIZED
THE CONNECTION BETWEEN
SENTIMENT, VIRTUE,
SENSIBILITY, AND SOCIETY
- GIVING RISE TO A
LITERARY TRADITION
THAT WOULD SET DEEP
ROOTS IN LATIN AMERICA.
PERHAPS THE MOST
EXCEPTIONAL SENTIMENTAL
NOVEL OF THE PERIOD WAS
MARIA, A WORK BY THE
COLOMBIAN JORGE ISAACS,
WHO EARNED THE NICKNAME
"THE GENTLEMAN
OF THE TEARS".
MARIA WAS FIRST
PUBLISHED IN BOGOTA,
COLUMBIA IN 1867.
ITS PUBLICATION AS
A FULL-FLEDGED NOVEL
WAS ITSELF REMARKABLE, AS
MOST NOVELS OF THE TIME
WERE SERIALIZED
IN NEWSPAPERS.
THIS FATEFUL
LOVE STORY
ENJOYED ALMOST
IMMEDIATE SUCCESS;
BY 1889 IT HAD REACHED
ITS TWENTY-FIRST EDITION.
MARIA TELLS THE TRAGIC
LOVE STORY OF MARIA AND
HER COUSIN EFRAIN, WHO ARE
FROM VALLE DEL CAUCA -
A STATE IN WESTERN COLOMBIA
THAT BORDERS THE PACIFIC.
THIS IS A NOVEL ABOUT
LOSS AND BANISHMENT,
ABOUT PARADISE LOST, AND BY
ANALOGY IT ADDRESSES THE
DIFFICULTIES OF CREATING
A NATION OUT OF A COLONY.
IN KEEPING WITH THE
ROMANTIC IDEALIZATION
OF THE ARTIST, THE STORY
IS HIGHLY AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL.
ISAACS HIMSELF WAS A
NATIVE OF VALLE DEL CAUCA
AND, LIKE HIS
HERO EFRAIN,
WENT TO BOGOTA TO
PURSUE HIS STUDIES.
MARIA IS A NOVEL THAT CAN
BE READ ON DIFFERENT LEVELS.
SO THERE'S AN EMOTIONAL
LEVEL, WHICH IS A MORE
ADOLESCENT READING
OF THE NOVEL.
BUT THERE'S ALSO A
POLITICAL READING BECAUSE
IT'S A NOVEL WHERE THE
ISSUE OF SLAVERY APPEARS.
AND PERHAPS
THIS IS OVERLOOKED
IN AN EMOTIONAL
READING OF THE BOOK.
WHAT IS IT THAT IS MOST
MEMORABLE ABOUT MARIA?
THE POLITICAL PART?
THE EMOTIONAL PART?
IT'S ALSO A NOVEL THAT HAS
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SLANT.
AND THAT ALLOWS FOR
READING ON ANOTHER LEVEL.
IT CAN ALSO BE READ
LOOKING AT THE PASSAGE OF
A PRE-INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY
TO A MODERN SOCIETY.
THE NOVEL UNFOLDS ALMOST
DETERMINISTICALLY,
THE OUTCOME KNOWN TO THE
READER FROM THE OUTSET
THANKS TO A DEDICATION
THAT ANTICIPATES
THE PROTAGONISTS' DEATH:
THUS, THE SKY,
THE HORIZONS,
THE PAMPAS AND THE
SUMMITS OF THE CAUCA
MAKE ANYONE WHO CONTEMPLATES
THEM FALL SILENT.
THE GREAT BEAUTY OF
CREATION CANNOT BE SEEN
AND SUNG OF
SIMULTANEOUSLY.
THEY MUST RETURN
TO ONE'S SOUL,
MADE PALLID BY
UNFAITHFUL MEMORY.
LATIN AMERICA'S HISTORICAL
NOVELS CARRIED ON
IN THE TRADITION OF SIR
WALTER SCOTT'S IVANHOE
AND WERE IMBUED WITH
THE SENSIBILITIES OF
ROMANTICISM, THE DOMINANT
AESTHETIC OF THE TIME.
HOWEVER, THE CONTINENT
TURNED TO ITS OWN PAST FOR
INSPIRATION, RECOUNTING
THE DEEDS AND EXPLOITS OF
THE CONQUISTADORS WHILE
AT THE SAME TIME SHOWING
THE INFLUENCE OF ALEXANDRE
DUMAS AND VICTOR HUGO.
THE FIRST LATIN AMERICAN
HISTORICAL NOVEL,
PUBLISHED ANONYMOUSLY IN
1826, TOLD THE STORY OF AN
INDIGENOUS WARRIOR NAMED
JICOTENCAL WHO DID BATTLE
WITH THE INVADING FORCES
LED BY HERNAN CORTES.
WHILE A MINOR NOVEL
BY ANY STANDARD,
JICOTENCAL MARKED
THE GENESIS OF
A GENRE THAT WOULD
BECOME WILDLY POPULAR
THROUGHOUT
THE CONTINENT.
THESE WORKS WERE UNITED
BY A COMMON GOAL:
TO REBUILD
THE CONTINENT'S
NATIONAL AND
CULTURAL IDENTITIES
IN THE WAKE OF
ACHIEVING INDEPENDENCE.
THEY TRUSTED IN THE
POWER OF THE PAST
TO INFORM THE PRESENT,
AND ASSUMED THAT
THERE WAS AN ORGANIC
SUCCESSION TO EVENTS
WHICH WOULD HAVE
MEANING FOR THE READER.
HISTORY, LIKE LITERATURE,
IS LOCAL AND COMPLEX.
THE IDEA OF IDENTITY AS
SOMETHING ESSENTIAL...
IS A MYTH...
AND SOMETIMES A
MYSTIFICATION.
BUT THEY WERE CONSIDERING
HOW TO BUILD A NEW SOCIETY
WHICH HAD CHARACTERISTICS
THAT THEY WOULD HAVE TO
SHARE WITH A RATHER
LIMITED AUDIENCE,
IN THE FIRST PLACE BECAUSE
THERE WEREN'T MANY READERS.
AND ALSO BECAUSE THE
READERS MIGHT HAVE BEEN
RELUCTANT DUE TO THEIR
READINGS OF FRENCH AUTHORS.
SOME OF THE MOST OUTSTANDING
AUTHORS OF THIS GENRE
WERE THE ECUADORIAN
JUAN LEON DE MENA,
THE DOMINICAN MANUEL
DE JESUS GALVAN,
THE MEXICAN VICENTE
RIBA PALACIO,
THE BOLIVIAN
NATANIEL AGUIRRE,
AND ALBERTO BLEST
GANA FROM CHILE.
BESIDES THE CONQUEST
OF THE NEW WORLD,
THE PREDOMINANT
THEMES IN THEIR WORKS
WERE PRE-COLOMBIAN
SOCIETIES
AND THE STRUGGLES OF
THE EARLY COLONIALISTS.
MANY WORKS, SUCH AS
THE HERETIC'S LOVE
BY THE ARGENTINEAN WRITER
VICENTE FIDEL LOPEZ,
PAID SPECIAL ATTENTION
TO THE OVERFLOW
OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION
INTO THE NEW WORLD,
WHICH WAS ESPECIALLY
VIRULENT IN PERU AND MEXICO.
PIRACY AND LIFE
ON THE HIGH SEAS
WERE ALSO FAVORITE
TOPICS, LEADING TO
THE BUCCANEER BY
JUSTO SIERRA O'REILLY
AND THE PIRATES OF THE GULF
BY VINCENTE RIVA PALACIO,
BOTH OF WHOM
WERE FROM MEXICO.
A SEMINAL TEXT OF THIS
TIME IS THE NOVEL
GUATIMOZIN: LAST
EMPEROR OF MEXICO
BY CUBAN WRITER GERTRUDIS
GOMEZ DE AVELLANEDA,
PUBLISHED IN 1846.
HER NOVEL REACHED DEEP
INTO THE CONTINENT'S
PSYCHE AND PAST, PLUMBING
FOUNDATIONAL TEXTS SUCH AS
HERNAN CORTES'
LETTERS OF RELATION,
THE TRUE HISTORY OF THE
CONQUEST OF NEW SPAIN
BY BERNAL DIAZ
DEL CASTILLO,
AND THE HISTORY OF
THE CONQUEST OF MEXICO
BY ANTONIO DE SOLIS.
LEAVENING HISTORY WITH
IMAGINATION, AVELLANEDA
RECOUNTED THE ADVANCE
OF THE SPANISH ARMY
ON AMERICAN TERRITORY,
ITS ALLIANCES WITH THE
TLAXCALTECS, THE WAR WITH
THE AZTECS, AND THE FALL
OF TENOCHTITLAN - THE
CAPITAL OF THE AZTEC
EMPIRE THAT IS NOW THE
SITE OF MEXICO CITY.
THE NOVEL OFFERS A NUANCED
VIEW THAT BOTH JUSTIFIES
CORTES' ACTIONS AND CONDEMNS
HIS INDIGENOUS ALLIES.
MESO-AMERICAN
SOCIETIES ARE, HOWEVER,
PRESENTED IN A GENERALLY
POSITIVE LIGHT;
IN PARTICULAR THE
FIGURE OF CUAUTEMOC,
THE AZTEC EMPEROR WHO
SUCCEEDED MONTEZUMA,
IS PORTRAYED
AS A TRAGIC HERO.
THEY REACHED THE PLACE
CHOSEN FOR MARTYRDOM,
WHERE THE UNRULY TROOPS
AWAITED TO TAKE THEIR
VICTIMS WITH CRIES
OF FEROCIOUS JOY.
ALREADY HAD THEY
PREPARED THE GRATES
IN WHICH THEY
WOULD BURN.
ANOTHER HISTORICAL NOVEL
OF NOTE IS CUMANDA,
WRITTEN BY JUAN LEON MERA
AND PUBLISHED IN 1879.
INSPIRED BY THE WORKS
OF CHATEAUBRIAND
AND AIMED AT EUROPEAN
READERS, THE NOVEL IS,
AS ITS SUBTITLE DECLARES,
A "DRAMA AMONG SAVAGES".
IT RECOUNTS THE LOVE
AFFAIR BETWEEN CUMANDA,
A YOUNG WOMAN WHO BELIEVES
HERSELF TO BE INDIAN,
AND CARLOS,
A WHITE MAN.
IN A TWIST OF FATE THAT IS
A HALLMARK OF ROMANTICISM,
THE STAR-CROSSED LOVERS
TURN OUT TO BE SIBLINGS.
CONSIDERED TO BE THE
FIRST ECUADORIAN NOVEL,
THE WORK IS RIFE WITH
ROMANTIC FLOURISHES:
FATALISM, THE
CELEBRATION OF SENTIMENT,
THE PERFECTION AND GOODNESS
OF THE YOUNG HEROINE.
IT'S ONCE AGAIN A LOVE
AFFAIR BETWEEN A WHITE MAN
AND AN INDIAN, WHO TURNS
OUT NOT TO BE INDIAN,
BUT RATHER HIS SISTER.
INCEST IS A VERY INTERESTING
TOPIC IN THESE NOVELS.
BECAUSE OF THE EXTRAMARITAL
AFFAIRS OF WEALTHY MEN,
ONE NEVER KNOWS WHO
MIGHT BE THEIR SIBLING.
FRAMED BY LUSH
DESCRIPTIONS OF FLORA,
FAUNA, AND INDIGENOUS
CUSTOMS, THE PLOT TRACES
THE UNFOLDING OF THEIR
UNKNOWINGLY INCESTUOUS
RELATIONSHIP - A THEME
THAT WILL BE REVISITED
OFTEN IN LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE,
AS IN THE CASE OF ONE
HUNDRED YEARS OF SOLITUDE
BY THE COLOMBIAN AUTHOR
GARCIA MARQUEZ.
CUMANDA'S POLITICAL AGENDA
BEGINS TO TAKE FORM
ONLY WHEN YOU CONSIDER THE
CONTEXT OF ECUADOR IN THE
1800'S, WHERE A MAJORITY
OF THE INDIAN POPULATION
EXISTS IN A STATE OF ABJECT
POVERTY AND SERVITUDE.
YET MERA'S FICTIONAL
"GOOD SAVAGES" HAVE LITTLE
IF ANYTHING IN COMMON WITH
THEIR REAL COUNTERPARTS,
WHO TOILED UNDER
THE OPPRESSIVE
SHARECROPPING SYSTEM
KNOWN AS HUASIPUNGO.
HALF WAY THERE,
NIGHT FELL.
A BOY WHO WAS COMING
FROM THE SPOT WHERE THE
UPRISING TOOK PLACE TOLD
HIM THAT SEVERAL HOUSES
IN THE COUNTRYSIDE HAD
BEEN BURNED BY THE INDIANS,
WHO HAD NOT LEFT A SINGLE
WHITE PERSON ALIVE.
DON JOSE DOMINGO BURST
THE GUTS OF THE HORSE,
WHICH MADE VALIANT
EFFORTS TO CLIMB A HILL,
BUT DIED OF EXHAUSTION.
IT DID NOT MATTER: THE
FEAR OF ARRIVING LATE,
THE DESIRE TO FLY, THE
ANXIETY, GAVE HIM WINGS
AND HE MADE IT
UP THE HILL.
HE SAW THICK
CLOUDS OF SMOKE.
JUAN DE LA ROSA,
BY THE BOLIVIAN WRITER
NATANIEL AGUIRRE, WAS
PUBLISHED IN 1885.
ITS FULL TITLE IS JUAN DE
LA ROSA: MEMOIRS OF THE
LAST SOLDIER OF THE
INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT.
AGUIRRE AUTHORED MANY
OTHER WELL-KNOWN WORKS
SUCH AS THE BIOGRAPHY
OF SIMON BOLIVAR,
THE WAR OF THE PACIFIC,
REPRISAL OF A HERO,
AND VISIONARIES
AND MARTYRS.
IN JUAN DE LA ROSA,
AGUIRRE'S PROTAGONIST
REFLECTS BACK ON THE
EVENTS THAT TOOK PLACE
IN BOLIVIA BETWEEN
1809 AND 1811,
IN PARTICULAR THE
LA PAZ INSURRECTION
AND THE INDEPENDENCE
OF COCHABAMBA,
TWO SEMINAL EVENTS
IN BOLIVIAN HISTORY.
THROUGH AN IMAGINATIVE
AND INTERPRETIVE ACT OF
MEMORY, AGUIRRE USED THE
NOVEL TO CONFRONT THE PAST
WHILE ENVISIONING THE
POSSIBILITY OF A FUTURE.
THROUGH 26 CHAPTERS,
JUAN DE LA ROSA LAYS OUT
A BIOGRAPHY THAT IS ALSO
THE STORY OF A COUNTRY
AND OF A CONTINENT.
THE NARRATIVE ROAMS ACROSS
THE FACE OF THE AMERICAS
- PARTICULARLY THE
ANDEAN COUNTRYSIDE -
AND IS POPULATED WITH
IDEALIZED FEMALE CHARACTERS
CUT FROM ROMANTIC CLOTH.
AGUIRRE INCORPORATED
INDIGENOUS CHARACTERS,
OFTEN DEPICTED AS POOR
AND OPPRESSED, AS WELL AS
SONGS, POEMS, AND
MELANCHOLY INDIAN DIRGES
KNOWN AS YARAVIES, WHICH
ARE PRESENTED IN QUECHUA
AND TRANSLATED
INTO SPANISH.
WHEN I AWOKE, I HEARD A
FEW MUSKET AND RIFLE SHOTS
IN THE DISTANCE,
AND A LITTLE LATER,
CALLS TO ARMS COMING
FROM THE HIGH TOWER
OF THE MATRIZ,
IMMEDIATELY RESPONDED TO
BY THE GREAT BELL OF SAN
FRANCISCO, AND THEN BY
THE BELLS FROM
CHURCHES ALL AROUND.
I QUICKLY DRESSED,
AND RAN TO THE DOOR.
THERE WAS SUCH AN UPROAR
COMING FROM THE SQUARE!
LARGE CROWDS OF
MEN AND WOMEN
WERE RUSHING IN
THAT DIRECTION.
ENRIQUILLO, A NOVEL BY
THE DOMINICAN WRITER
MANUEL DE JESUS GALVAN,
WAS FIRST PUBLISHED
AS A COMPLETE
EDITION IN 1882.
THE TITLE REFERS TO ITS
HERO, AN INDIAN CACIQUE
OR CHIEF, WHO WAS RAISED BY
THE SPANISH AND EMBODIED
VIRTUOUS ELEMENTS OF BOTH
THE NEW AND OLD WORLDS.
IN THE EARLY COLONIAL
PERIOD DURING WHICH
THE NOVEL IS SET,
THE ENCOMENDEROS WERE
SPANISH OVERLORDS
WHO COLLECTED TAXES
FROM INDIANS
WORKING THE LAND,
AND THEN FORCED THE
CATHOLIC FAITH ON THEM.
IN THE NOVEL, ENRIQUILLO
LEADS A REBELLION
AGAINST THE
ENCOMENDEROS.
GALVAN'S WORK WAS
DERIVED FROM INTENSE
HISTORICAL RESEARCH AND
HAS OVER 150 FOOTNOTES.
IT IS A KIND OF
FICTIONALIZED DOCUMENTARY
OF THE INDIANS' LIFE OF
POVERTY AND SERVITUDE.
THE NAME OF JARAGUA
STANDS OUT IN THE FIRST
PAGES OF THE HISTORY OF
AMERICA WITH THE VERY
PRESTIGE THAT THE
INNOCENT ARCADIA,
THE GOLDEN HESPERIA, THE
BEAUTIFUL VALLEY OF TEMPE,
AND OTHER PRIVILEGED
REGIONS OF THE GLOBE HAD
IN ANCIENT TIMES AND IN
MYTHOLOGICAL NARRATIONS
BEEN BESTOWED BY NATURE
WITH ALL THE CHARMS
TO SEDUCE IMAGINATION.
AS SUCH PLACES, THE
INDIAN KINGDOM OF JARAGUA
APPEARS BEFORE THE
MODERN ARGONAUTS
IN SEARCH OF
ITS CONQUEST,
AS A RICH, CONTENT
AND MARVELOUS REGION.
WHEN IT COMES TO
REVISITING AND
REINTERPRETING
THE PAST,
FEW WRITERS CAN SURPASS
RICARDO PALMA OF PERU.
PALMA IS CREDITED WITH
CREATING AN ENTIRELY
NEW LITERARY GENRE
CALLED TRADICION
WHICH SYNTHESIZES
FICTION AND HISTORY
TO FORM A KIND OF
HISTORICAL ANECDOTE.
TRADICION WEAVES TOGETHER
TREATISES, JOURNALISM,
FOLKTALES, ORAL HISTORIES,
AND SCHOLARLY RESEARCH
TO CREATE AN ALTERNATIVE
KIND OF HISTORY,
ONE WITH MORE IN COMMON
WITH FABLES AND FOLKLORE
THAN WITH JOURNALS
AND PRIMARY SOURCES.
RICARDO PALMA
WAS BORN IN 1833.
DURING HIS CAREER HE WAS BY
TURNS A POET, JOURNALIST,
AND DIRECTOR OF THE
PERUVIAN NATIONAL LIBRARY.
AS A MEMBER OF THE
ROYAL SPANISH ACADEMY,
HE WAS KNOWN THROUGHOUT
THE CONTINENT
AND KEPT UP A PROLIFIC
CORRESPONDENCE WITH
SOME OF THE OUTSTANDING
INTELLECTUALS OF THE TIME
SUCH AS WRITER
JUANA MANUELA GORRITI
AND THE CRITIC JUAN
MARIA GUTIERREZ.
PERU IN THE MID NINETEENTH
CENTURY WAS STRUGGLING TO
COME TO TERMS WITH ITS
INCAN HERITAGE, AND PALMA
WAS INSTRUMENTAL IN
FIXING HIS COUNTRY'S PAST
FIRMLY IN THE INDIGENOUS
CULTURAL TRADITION.
THOUGH HIS HISTORIES WERE
IMPRECISE AND RELIED
HEAVILY ON HEARSAY,
THEY PROVIDED READERS
WITH A SENSE OF
WHAT IT WAS LIKE
TO LIVE IN THE
VANISHED INCAN ERA.
PALMA COMBINED
PHILOLOGY
- THE STUDY OF LANGUAGE AS
USED IN LITERATURE -
WITH SATIRE TO CREATE
HIS TRADICIONS.
WHILE GROUNDED
IN ROMANTICISM,
HIS WORKS AT
THE SAME TIME
SUBVERTED ROMANTIC
SENSIBILITIES BY USING
GOSSIP, OLD-WIVES' TALES,
AND PROVERBS TO PRESENT
A CARNIVALESQUE,
BOTTOM-UP VIEW OF LIFE
IN THE COLONIAL PERIOD.
THERE'S A SAYING THAT SAYS
THAT THE MULE AND PATIENCE
GET WEARY IF
THEY ARE RUSHED.
AND THE SAME
GOES FOR LOVE.
BENEDICTA AND AQUILINO
WENT OFF IN SUCH A HURRY
THAT HALF A YEAR
AFTER THEIR ESCAPE,
THE BORED LOVER TOOK A
FRENCH LEAVE, THAT IS,
HE SIMPLY DISAPPEARED,
AND THERE'S THE CHEESE,
LEFT TO BECOME
THE MICE'S LUNCH,
AND HE ENCOUNTERED HIS
HUMANITY ON MOUNT PASCO.
BENEDICTA SPENT DAYS AND
WEEKS WAITING FOR THE
RETURN OF THE SMOKE OR,
WHICH IS THE SAME, THAT OF
THE SCOUNDREL THAT LEFT
HER MORE UNDRESSED THAN A
KEYHOLE; UNTIL, CONVINCED
OF HER MISFORTUNE,
SHE DECIDED NOT TO
RETURN TO HER AUNT'S,
AND RENTED A SMALL PLACE
ON ALAMEDA STREET.
PALMA'S PARLOR TRICK OF
MAINTAINING CONTINUITY
WHILE AT THE SAME TIME
BREAKING WITH THE PAST
WAS ACHIEVED
THROUGH HIS DEFT
MANIPULATION
OF LANGUAGE.
HE RAIDED THE LINGUISTIC
TOOL KIT OF THE COMMON MAN
- SAYINGS, PROVERBS,
ARCHAIC TURNS OF PHRASE -
TO POKE FUN AT THE
RELIGIOUS, LEGAL,
AND ROYAL PROCLAMATIONS
OF THE COLONIAL PERIOD.
PALMA INSISTED ON SPANISH
BEING AN AMERICAN LANGUAGE,
INTRINSICALLY BOUND TO
THE CONTINENT'S IDENTITY.
WHILE SPANISH MAY
BE A SHARED TONGUE,
IT IS AT THE SAME TIME ONE
INFLECTED BY LOCAL NUANCES
AND PECULIARITIES.
LATIN AMERICA IN THE
NINETEENTH CENTURY
WAS A BREEDING GROUND
FOR LITERATURE
THAT OPENLY DEFIED
EASY CATEGORIZATION.
WHEREAS THEIR EUROPEAN
COUNTERPARTS OFTEN
ASSOCIATED THEIR WORK
WITH A PARTICULAR SCHOOL
OR GENRE, WRITERS IN
THE NEW WORLD SEEMED TO
DELIGHT IN SPLITTING
THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN REALISM
AND ROMANTICISM,
BETWEEN THE HISTORICAL
AND THE SENTIMENTAL,
BETWEEN LOVE STORIES AND
NATIONALISTIC FICTION.
A CLASSIC EXAMPLE OF
THIS TREND IS AMALIA
BY THE ARGENTINEAN
WRITER JOSE MARMOL.
WHILE ON ONE LEVEL
A LOVE STORY,
THE NOVEL IS AT THE SAME
TIME HIGHLY POLITICAL,
AND IT IS SET DURING
THE TENURE OF THE
REAL-LIFE DICTATOR
JUAN MANUEL DE ROSAS.
ROSAS WAS A CAUDILLO, A
MILITIA LEADER WITH A
CHARISMATIC PERSONALITY
AND A POPULIST PROGRAM
THAT GAINED HIM
BROAD SUPPORT.
AMALIA TAKES PLACE DURING
A VERY STRANGE TIME
IN THE ROSAS
GOVERNMENT:
1840, KNOWN AS THE
YEAR OF TERROR.
IT WAS JUST BEFORE
THE FALL OF LAVALLE.
AND MARMOL IS AN
INTERESTING FIGURE BECAUSE
HE IS A LITTLE YOUNGER
THAN ECHEVERRIA,
ALBERDI, GUITIERREZ
AND SARMIENTO.
MARMOL MANAGES TO
SYNTHESIZE THE REGRETS
OF THIS WHOLE GROUP.
IN A TIME WHEN DIRECT
POLITICAL ACTION ENTAILED
HUGE PERSONAL RISK,
FICTIONAL ACCOUNTS LIKE
AMALIA OFFERED THE AUTHOR
A MEASURE OF PROTECTION.
MARMOL WROTE THE WORK
WHILE LIVING IN EXILE
IN MONTEVIDEO;
UNSURPRISINGLY, MOST
ARGENTINEAN LITERATURE
FROM THIS PERIOD WAS
CREATED BY EXILED WRITERS.
IN THE DEDICATION TO
AMALIA, MARMOL WROTE THAT
HE WANTED HIS BOOK, "TO BE
READ BY FUTURE GENERATIONS
- AS IN THE CASE OF
EVERYTHING THAT IS WRITTEN,
GOOD OR BAD - RELATIVE
TO THE DRAMATIC ERA
OF THE ARGENTINEAN
DICTATORSHIP".
CLEARLY, THIS IS INTENDED
TO BE A POLITICAL NOVEL.
ONE THAT CANNOT BE
COMPLETELY EXPLAINED
ON THE BASIS OF ITS
ROMANTIC ELEMENTS.
THIS IS A WORK THAT
SIMULTANEOUSLY REVELS IN
AND TRANSCENDS
ROMANTICISM.
AMALIA HIGHLIGHTS
A TENSION BETWEEN
ROMANTICISM AND REALISM.
WHILE ROMANTICISM
EMPHASIZES ABOVE ALL
THE FICTIONAL
ASPECTS OF THE NOVEL,
AS IN THE LOVE AFFAIR
BETWEEN AMALIA AND EDUARDO,
ITS AUTHOR'S
PENCHANT FOR REALISM
CAN BE READILY
DISCERNED
IN THE DOCUMENTARY
FEATURES OF THE WORK.
IN PARTICULAR, THE REAL
LIFE FIGURE OF ROSAS
AND THE MACHINATIONS OF
HIS PARAMILITARY FORCE
KNOWN AS LA MAZORCA,
OR "THE CORNCOB".
ON A MAY 4, 1840, AT 10:30
PM., SIX MEN WERE WALKING
ACROSS THE PATIO OF A
LITTLE HOUSE ON THE
CALLE DE BELGRANO, IN
THE CITY OF BUENOS AIRES.
IN REACHING THE ENTRYWAY,
AS DARK AS THE REST OF THE
HOUSE, ONE OF THEM HALTED
AND SAID TO THE OTHERS,
"STILL ONE MORE
PRECAUTION".
"IF WE GO ON LIKE
THIS, WE'LL BE TAKING
PRECAUTIONS ALL NIGHT
LONG", ANOTHER ANSWERED,
APPARENTLY THE YOUNGEST OF
ALL OF THEM, WITH A LONG
SWORD AT HIS SIDE, HALF
CONCEALED BY THE FOLDS OF
A BLUE WOOL CAPE HANGING
FROM HIS SHOULDERS.
ANOTHER SEMINAL PIECE OF
ARGENTINEAN LITERATURE
IS ESTEBAN ECHEVERRIA'S
STORY ENTITLED
THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE, WRITTEN
BETWEEN 1838 AND 1840
DURING HIS EXILE
IN MONTEVIDEO.
ECHEVERRIA, ONE OF
THE MOST IMPORTANT
ROMANTIC WRITERS
IN LATIN AMERICA,
DIDN'T LIVE TO SEE
HIS STORY PUBLISHED.
IT WAS ONLY REDISCOVERED
AFTER HIS DEATH BY THE
NOTED EDITOR AND CRITIC
JUAN MARIA GUTIERREZ.
IT WAS PUBLISHED IN
1871 IN THE JOURNAL
REVISTA DEL RIO
DE LA PLATA.
THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE
EXAMINES A DICHOTOMY
AT THE CORE OF LATIN
AMERICAN SOCIETY
THAT TRACES ITS ROOTS BACK
TO THE SPANISH CONQUEST.
ON THE ONE HAND, THERE IS
THE CIVILIZING INFLUENCE
THAT IS EUROPE, WITH
ITS ANCIENT CULTURAL
INSTITUTIONS, MORALS,
AND TRADITIONS.
ON THE OTHER, THERE IS
WHAT IS PERCEIVED AS A
PRIMITIVE AND VIOLENT
INDIGENOUS SOCIETY.
BETWEEN THESE TWO EXTREMES
LIES A GREAT IRONY,
IN THAT THE "CIVILIZING"
OF THE NEW WORLD
WAS EXECUTED WITH
BREATHTAKING SAVAGERY.
SO THE CLASH BETWEEN
CIVILIZATION AND BARBARISM
THAT IS AT THE CORE
OF THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE
IS NOT ONLY THEMATIC,
IT IS ALSO HISTORICAL
AND IT IS CRITICAL.
THERE IS NO WAY THAT
CONTEMPORARY READERS
COULD NOT HAVE READ IT
AS SOMETHING OTHER THAN
A POLITICAL ALLEGORY
CONDEMNING THE DICTATOR
JUAN MANUEL DE ROSAS.
IN THE CASE OF THE
SLAUGHTERHOUSE,
CONCERNING THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
ROMANTICISM AND REALISM
AND THEIR AESTHETICS,
IT'S INTERESTING HOW
ANYTHING RELATED TO
THE REPRESENTATION
OF THE REFINED WORLD,
OF HIGH SOCIETY, THE
WORLD OF THE UNITARIO
WHO WILL BECOME
VICTIMS OF ROSAS' FORCES
AT THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE, IS
REPRESENTED IN A STYLE
THAT IS SUPPOSEDLY
HIGH AND REFINED.
THE TENSIONS THAT DRIVE
THIS STORY ARE MANY;
BETWEEN ADVOCATES OF THE
RURAL FOLKS - GAUCHOS AND
RESIDENTS OF LAS PAMPAS
- AND URBAN DWELLERS;
BETWEEN UNITARIOS WHO
WANTED TO CONCENTRATE ALL
POLITICAL POWER IN BUENOS
AIRES AND FEDERALES WHO
ADVOCATED SPREADING POWER
THROUGHOUT THE PROVINCES.
ROSAS HAD BEEN A
FEDERALIST WAR HERO WHO
AMASSED HUGE TRACTS OF
LAND DURING THE CIVIL WAR
BETWEEN THESE
TWO PARTIES.
THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE
AT THE CENTER OF
ECHEVERRIA'S STORY
IS A HUGE FACILITY,
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE VAST
HOLDINGS ROSAS CONTROLLED.
ROSAS HAD SUPPORT FROM A
VARIETY OF DEMOGRAPHICS,
RANGING FROM POWERFUL
LANDOWNERS TO THE POOR,
WHO HOPED THAT THE
POWER OF THE DICTATOR
WOULD EASE THEIR PLIGHT.
THIS POLITICAL
COALITION IS REFLECTED
IN WHAT ECHEVERRIA
DESCRIBES AS
"THE GROUP OF PEOPLE OF
DIFFERENT SKIN COLORS"
THAT ARE FOUND IN
THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE.
THE AUTHOR CONDEMNS THOSE
WHO PASSIVELY SUBMITTED
TO POWER AND,
BY THEIR SUBMISSION,
FACILITATE THE EVIL
OF THE ROSAS REGIME.
THE STORY IS INTERWOVEN
WITH THE PERVASIVE TROPE
THAT "THE FEDERALES
NEVER UNDERSTAND"
- A NOTION THAT WILL
BE REITERATED
IN DOMINGO SARMIENTO'S
FACUNDO.
THIS FUNDAMENTAL LACK OF
UNDERSTANDING EXTENDS TO
THE ALMOST WILLFUL,
DEFIANT IGNORANCE
OF A PEOPLE WHO DO NOT
WANT TO HEAR THE TRUTH.
THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE RESISTS
COMPROMISE BETWEEN ELITISM
AND POPULISM, BETWEEN
FEDERALES AND UNITARIOS.
AT THE CENTER OF POWER
SITS THE RESTORER.
SUCH INSOLENCE!
YOU HAVE GOTTEN
MUCH ANGRIER.
I WILL HAVE YOUR TONGUE
CUT OUT IF YOU SPEAK.
TAKE THIS IDIOT'S DRAWERS
DOWN AND CANE HIS
BARE BOTTOM, KEEPING HIM
WELL TIED-UP ON THE TABLE.
THE JUDGE HAD BARELY
UTTERED THIS WHEN FOUR
BLOOD-SPATTERED HENCHMEN
GRABBED THE YOUTH
AND HELD HIM SPREAD-EAGLED
ON THE TABLE,
PINNING ALL
OF HIS LIMBS.
"I'D SOONER HAVE MY THROAT
SLIT THAN BE STRIPPED,
VILLAINOUS SWINE".
THE DOMINANT ARTISTIC MODE
OF THE FIRST HALF OF THE
NINETEENTH CENTURY
WAS ROMANTICISM,
AND IN LATIN AMERICA THIS
AESTHETIC WAS INEXTRICABLY
ALLIED WITH NATIONAL
INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS.
HOWEVER, ROMANTIC
SENSIBILITIES HAD
PRECURSORS LONG BEFORE
ROMANTICISM EVER LANDED
ON THE SHORES OF
THE NEW WORLD.
SUCH AS ESTEBAN ECHEVERRIA'S
THE CAPTIVE WOMAN,
A LONG NARRATIVE POEM
ABOUT A WHITE WOMAN
ABDUCTED BY AN
INDIGENOUS TRIBE.
ECHEVERRIA WAS AN
INTELLECTUAL WHO BECAME
POPULAR IN BUENOS AIRES
AMONG YOUNG PEOPLE WHO
BECAME ATTACHED TO THESE
NEW IDEAS AND CONCEPTS
OF LITERATURE
AND POLITICS.
IN LATIN AMERICA,
POETRY IS PARTICULARLY
WELL-SUITED FOR TAKING
POLITICAL STANDS.
THE PUBLIC IMAGE OF
THE POET HAS LONG BEEN
THAT OF A SEER, A
SPEAKER OF THE TRUTH,
ONE WHO HAS THE METTLE
TO TAKE UP THE PEN
TO PROCLAIM HIS NOTIONS
OF COUNTRY AND LIBERTY.
MOREOVER, MANY
LATIN AMERICAN POETS
WERE EITHER IN EXILE OR
CONSTANTLY ON THE MOVE,
WHICH SEGUES NEATLY
WITH ROMANTIC NOSTALGIA
FOR A LOST FATHERLAND.
AMONG THE EARLY
ROMANTIC POETS WERE
JOSE JOAQUIN OLMEDO,
ANDRES BELLO,
AND JOSE
MARIA HEREDIA,
A CUBAN WRITER
BORN IN 1803.
NEOCLASSICIST BY EDUCATION
BUT ROMANTIC TO THE CORE,
HEREDIA'S ENTIRE OUTPUT
TEEMS WITH PASSION, LOVE,
NATURE, PATRIOTISM,
FREEDOM, AND DEATH.
IT'S A RICH MIX, VERY
DIFFICULT TO STUDY.
WHY? BECAUSE THERE IS
INDEPENDENT DEVELOPMENT
OF HISTORICAL AND
LITERARY THOUGHT
BUT AT THE SAME TIME
THERE IS ADAPTATION
OF THAT WHICH IS
COMING FROM EUROPE.
BUT THIS DOESN'T
TAKE PLACE
AT THE SAME
PACE AS IN EUROPE.
SO WE HAVE AUTHORS
OF THE ENLIGHTENMENT
WHO WERE ALREADY READING
ROMANTIC AUTHORS.
AMONG HIS KEY
WORKS ARE THE POEM
IN THE TEOCALLI OF CHOLULA,
PUBLISHED IN 1820;
AND NIAGARA,
FROM 1824.
I WAS SEATED AT THE
FAMOUS CHOLULTEC PYRAMID.
THE VAST PLAIN
STRETCHING BEFORE ME
INVITED THE EYES
TO SPACE OUT.
WHAT SILENCE!
WHAT PEACE!
TO THINK THAT ACROSS
THESE BEAUTIFUL FIELDS
THERE REIGNS A
BARBAROUS OPPRESSION,
AND THAT THIS LAND,
FERTILE WITH HUMAN BLOOD,
FLOODED IN WAR
AND SUPERSTITION,
GROWS SO RICH
A GRAIN?
THE PROCESS OF GAINING
INDEPENDENCE IS
FUNDAMENTALLY A PROCESS
OF DEFINING NATIONAL
IDENTITY, AND AT THE CORE
OF NATIONAL IDENTITY
IS THE QUESTION
OF LANGUAGE.
IN LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE, THIS ISSUE WAS
PLAYED OUT IN LARGE PART
IN THE GENRE KNOWN AS
"GAUCHO LITERATURE".
THIS BODY OF WORK
HIGHLIGHTS AN UNLIKELY
ALLIANCE THAT FORMED
IN NINETEENTH CENTURY
ARGENTINA BETWEEN
THE GAUCHO
- ROUGHLY EQUIVALENT TO
NORTH AMERICA'S COWBOY -
AND THE EDUCATED ELITE.
THIS LITERATURE GAVE
VOICE, FOR THE FIRST TIME,
TO AN ENTIRE SEGMENT OF THE
POPULATION THAT HAD BEEN
MUTE, ITINERANT,
OFTEN ILLITERATE;
THE GAUCHO WAS A MAN OF
ACTION, NOT OF WORDS.
AND, NATURALLY,
THIS NEWFOUND VOICE
WAS OFTEN
RAISED TO PROCLAIM
BLATANTLY
POLITICAL MESSAGES.
WHAT DEFINES GAUCHO
LITERATURE IS THE USE OF
THE GAUCHO'S VOICE BY
AN EDUCATED WRITER.
SOMEONE WHO TAKES THE
VOICE OF THE GAUCHO
AND MAKES HIM SPEAK.
AND NORMALLY
IT'S POETRY,
ALTHOUGH SOMETIMES
IT'S PROSE.
BARTOLOME HIDALGO IS
CONSIDERED BY MOST
TO BE THE
FIRST GAUCHO POET.
HIS PERIOD OF PRODUCTIVITY
COINCIDED WITH THE
POLITICAL CAREER OF
JOSE GERVASIO ARTIGAS,
KNOWN AS "THE FATHER OF
URUGUAYAN INDEPENDENCE".
HIDALGO'S STYLISTIC
INNOVATION WAS TO
INCORPORATE THE
VOICE OF THE PEOPLE
INTO LATIN
AMERICAN POETRY.
THIS AESTHETIC INNOVATION
COINCIDED WITH
THE LAND REFORM MOVEMENT
THAT BROUGHT GREATER
ENFRANCHISEMENT TO GAUCHOS,
BLACKS, AND SLAVES.
IN HIS POEMS, HIDALGO USED
A METER AND RHYME SCHEME
THAT WAS EASILY
MEMORIZED,
ALLOWING THE POEMS TO
BE RECITED FROM MEMORY.
THIS STYLE SOON SPREAD
ACROSS THE CONTINENT.
IN ARGENTINA, HILARIO
ASCASUBI PRODUCED
HIS FAMOUS POEM
THE SHY WOMAN,
IN WHICH HE CHANNELED THE
VOICE OF THE COMMON FOLK
TO SPEAK OUT AGAINST
THE ROSAS GOVERNMENT.
IT'S COMPLEX
BECAUSE OF THIS:
TRYING TO PORTRAY THE
BARBARIANISM OF ROSAS,
THE HORROR OF ROSAS,
BY GIVING VOICE TO
A GAUCHO ON THE
SIDE OF ROSAS.
HE GIVES HIM THE VOICE TO
BETTER PORTRAY THE HORROR.
SO WHAT THE POEM SHOWS
IS THAT THE PERSON
NARRATING THIS
SITUATION ENJOYS IT,
AND THE TORTURE SCENE
BECOMES A PARTY.
MANY SCHOLARS ASSERT
THAT THE PINNACLE OF
GAUCHO POETRY IS MARTIN
FIERRO, AN EPIC POEM
BY THE ARGENTINE
WRITER JOSE HERNANDEZ.
THE POEM WAS PUBLISHED
IN TWO PARTS,
THE GAUCHO
MARTIN FIERRO
AND THE RETURN
OF MARTIN FIERRO.
THE AUTHOR WAS A MEMBER OF
THE PRIVILEGED CLASS WHO
HAD A PASTORAL VISION OF
LATIN AMERICA'S FUTURE.
HERNANDEZ WAS A STAUNCH
FEDERALIST, AND HIS POEM
LAMENTS THE EUROPEAN
INFLUENCE AND
MODERNIZATION PROGRAM
OF ARGENTINE PRESIDENT
DOMINGO FAUSTINO
SARMIENTO.
THE REBELLIOUS MARTIN
FIERRO DOMINATES PART ONE,
A FUGITIVE FROM JUSTICE
AND FROM THE ARMY
FOR OPPOSING
THE DRAFT.
BY PART TWO, A
MORE "DOMESTICATED"
FIERRO APPEARS, YEARNING FOR
A HOUSE, LAND, AND A WOMAN.
MARTIN FIERRO WAS WILDLY
POPULAR, A CULTURAL
PHENOMENON READ ALOUD IN
BARS AND TAVERNS TO A
CAPTIVE AUDIENCE OF
GAUCHOS, VERY FEW OF WHOM
COULD READ AND PRACTICALLY
NONE OF WHOM COULD WRITE.
IN ARGENTINA, THE
ILLITERACY RATE
AT THE TIME WAS 80%.
HAVING TO READ OR RECITE
THE WORK ALOUD WAS
IRONICALLY INSTRUMENTAL
TO ITS SUCCESS.
HERE, FINALLY, WAS
LITERATURE FOR AND ABOUT
THE REGULAR FOLK;
A WORK THAT INVESTIGATED
WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE A GAUCHO,
TO BE A PEOPLE,
TO BE A COUNTRY.
THE POEM ALSO MADE A CLEAR
DELINEATION BETWEEN
THAT WHICH IT DEEMED
RIGHT AND WORTHY
- WOMAN, HOUSE, AND LAND -
AND THAT WHICH WAS
DEEMED WRONG AND HARMFUL
- INDIANS,
INSUBORDINATION, NOMADISM.
TO MAKE SENSE OF THIS
ETHICAL CONSTRUCT,
IT HELPS TO KNOW THAT THE
GAUCHOS TRADITIONALLY
LED A NOMADIC
WAY OF LIFE.
THIS PROVED USEFUL DURING
THE WARS OF INDEPENDENCE
AND THE ROSAS REGIME,
BUT MUCH LESS SO FOR
A TERRITORY WHOSE LANDS,
SNATCHED FROM THE INDIANS
DURING THE INFAMOUS
DESERT CAMPAIGN,
NEEDED TO BE WORKED
AND CULTIVATED.
THE DEMONIZATION OF THE
NATIVE POPULATIONS,
MUCH EVIDENT IN
MARTIN FIERRO,
COINCIDES WITH
THEIR DECIMATION
OVER THE COURSE OF
THE DESERT CAMPAIGN.
HERE I COME TO SING TO
THE BEAT OF MY GUITAR.
BECAUSE A MAN WHO
IS KEPT FROM SLEEP
BY AN UNCOMMON SORROW
COMFORTS HIMSELF
WITH SINGING LIKE
A SOLITARY BIRD.
I BEG THE SAINTS IN HEAVEN
TO HELP MY THOUGHTS:
I BEG THEM HERE AND NOW AS
I START TO SING MY STORY
THAT THEY REFRESH
MY MEMORY
AND MAKE MY
UNDERSTANDING CLEAR.
REALISM AROSE IN EUROPE
PRIMARILY AS A REACTION
TO THE IDEALISM
OF ROMANTICISM.
THE REALIST MOVEMENT WAS
AN ATTEMPT TO DEAL WITH
THE WORLD AS IT REALLY
WAS, NOT AS WE WOULD
WISH IT TO BE, AND AS SUCH
WAS OFTEN LINKED WITH
A CALL FOR SOCIAL
AND POLITICAL REFORM.
IN EUROPE, THE
PROPONENTS OF REALISM
INCLUDED SUCH NAMES
AS STENDHAL, BALZAC,
GUSTAVE FLAUBERT,
AND EMILE ZOLA.
REALISM ARRIVED IN THE
NEW WORLD IN TYPICALLY
OUT-OF-SYNCH FASHION AND
EXISTED SIDE-BY-SIDE,
AND AT TIMES INEXTRICABLY
INTERMINGLED,
WITH ROMANTICISM FOR MUCH
OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.
WHEN IT DID TAKE HOLD,
HOWEVER, REALISM FOUND
ITS HOME IN THE CITIES
OF SOUTH AMERICA,
TURNING ITS COLD, OBJECTIVE
EYE ON THE PLIGHT OF THOSE
LIVING IN
URBAN SQUALOR.
IN ARGENTINA, WE SEE THE
WORK OF WRITERS SUCH AS
MANUEL GALVEZ AND
ELIAS CASTELNUOVO.
IN CHILE, WE FIND THE
NOVELIST BLEST GANA
WRITING REALIST WORKS THAT
ATTEMPTED TO RECONCILE
RELIGIOUS AND
MORAL IDEALS.
IN PERU, COLOMBIA, AND
MEXICO, NEWSPAPER SERIALS
AND ROMANTIC SET PIECES
DOMINATED THE 1800'S,
THOUGH BY THE END
OF THE CENTURY
AUTHORS SUCH AS CLORINDA
MATTO DE TURNER,
MERCEDES CABELLO
DE LA CARBONERA,
MIGUEL EDUARDO PARDO
AND EMILIO RABASA WERE
WRITING WORKS WITH DECIDEDLY
REALIST ATTRIBUTES.
AT THE CROSSROADS OF
ROMANTICISM AND REALISM
WE FIND LUCIO
V. LOPEZ,
A WRITER WHO EXAMINED
THE CORROSIVE MIX
OF POLITICS, FAMILY, AND
HISTORY IN HIS 1884 WORK
THE GREAT VILLAGE.
WITH A REALIST'S EYE
FOR THE TELLING DETAIL
AND THE ROMANTIC'S SENSE
OF MORAL CERTAINTY,
LOPEZ PICKED APART THE
HYPOCRISIES OF THE
BUENOS AIRES BOURGEOISIE
IN A TALE THAT IS AT ONCE
COOLLY OBJECTIVE AND
INTENSELY AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL.
DON CAMILO, A MAN OF
CONSIDERABLE EARNINGS,
WAS A PUBLIC MAN, EVEN
A DISTINGUISHED MAN.
I FELT THE HOPELESSNESS,
THE TERRIBLE HOPELESSNESS
THAT ONE CAN FEEL WHEN
FACED WITH THE IMPOSSIBLE,
WITH DEATH, WITH
THE IRREVERSIBLE,
AND I WONDERED IF THE SOUL
COULD BE TORN FROM THE BODY
AND THROWN AWAY AS A
USELESS OBSTACLE OF LIFE.
ANOTHER SEMINAL WORK WITH
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL OVERTONES
IS THE STORY
JUVENILIA,
WRITTEN BY MIGUEL
CANE IN 1884.
IN IT, CANE RECOUNTED
HIS EDUCATION AT THE
COLEGIO NACIONAL
IN BUENOS AIRES.
HE IDEALIZED A
MODEL OF EDUCATION
AND LEARNED CULTURE,
CONSTRUCTING A MEMORY OF
CHILDHOOD FLECKED WITH
HUMOR AND IRONY,
LAUGHTER AND VILLAINY,
IN SCENES PAINTED WITH
DECIDEDLY REALIST STROKES.
AT THE BORDERS OF
ROMANTICISM AND REALISM
CAN BE FOUND
TEXTS SUCH AS
POTPOURRI BY
EUGENIO CAMBACERES,
PUBLISHED IN 1881;
INNOCENT OR GUILTY BY
JUAN ANTONIO ARGERICH,
PUBLISHED IN 1884;
AND SOCIAL LAW BY
MARTIN GARCIA MEROU.
AS MANY EUROPEAN AND LATIN
AMERICAN WORKS COMBINE
BOTH TRENDS, THE
DISTINCTION BETWEEN
REALISM AND NATURALISM
IS OFTEN NOT CLEAR;
HOWEVER, CRITICS AGREE
THAT "NATURALIST" NOVELS
ARE TYPICALLY
THOSE WRITTEN
IN THE TRADITION
OF EMILE ZOLA.
HIS MOST FAMOUS NOVEL,
NANA, CIRCULATED
THROUGHOUT LATIN AMERICA
IN THE EARLY 1880'S,
CAUSING A SENSATION.
THE PUERTO RICAN NOVELIST
MANUEL ZENO GANDIA
SPENT TIME STUDYING
MEDICINE IN BARCELONA,
WHERE HE DEVELOPED
A LOVE OF THE
CONTINENTAL
LITERATURE OF THE DAY.
HE INTERNALIZED ZOLA'S
NOVELISTIC PERSPECTIVE
WHICH HE COMBINED WITH
HIS SCIENTIFIC APTITUDE
TO ANALYZE PUERTO
RICO'S RURAL SOCIETY.
THE RESULT WAS NOVELS SUCH
AS THE POND FROM 1894,
AND GARDUNA FROM 1896 -
WORKS WHICH INTERLACE
REALIST SENSIBILITIES
WITH MODERNIST PROSE.
THE VOICE TWIRLED
IN THE AIR AND,
REFLECTING ITSELF ON
THE MOUNTAIN-SIDE,
EASED DOWN INTO THE RIVER
BED WHERE IT WAS DIMMED
AMONG MURMURS OF
CASCADES AND WHIRLPOOLS.
BY THE RIVER,
CROUCHED UPON A STEADY
AND PLAIN STONE,
LEANDRA WASHED AWAY.
HER DRESS WAS TIED
BACK BEHIND HER KNEES,
REVEALING HER LEGS THAT
WERE WET WITH SOAPY WATER.
AT LAST, SHE
HEARD THE VOICES,
SHE LOOKED UP
AND SAW SILVINA.
IN MEXICO, THE WRITER AND
DIPLOMAT FEDERICO GAMBOA
CREATED AN EXTENSIVE
BODY OF WORK, INCLUDING
ONE OF THAT COUNTRY'S MOST
FAMOUS NOVELS, SANTA.
THE TALE FOCUSES ON A
FEMALE PROTAGONIST, SANTA,
WHO, BETRAYED BY HER
FIRST LOVER AND DISOWNED
BY HER FAMILY, TURNS TO
PROSTITUTION FOR SURVIVAL.
HERE WE HAVE A FIRST
PASSAGE FROM THE COUNTRY
TO THE CITY.
THE COUNTRY IS THE
PURE AND VIRGINAL.
THE CITY IS
FULL OF VICE.
AND IN THE CITY, SANTA'S
BODY BECOMES AN ALLEGORY,
IF I MAY SAY THAT.
AND IT SAYS THAT IN THE
NOVEL, THE WHOLE OF
SOCIETY WENT THROUGH
SANTA'S BODY.
AND IT GIVES EXAMPLES.
AND HOW DOES THAT BODY
END UP? THAT SOCIAL BODY?
DISEASED.
IT'S A BODY CONTAMINATED
BY THE VICES OF SOCIETY.
A PROSTITUTED BODY, BY
HERSELF AND BY OTHERS.
COMBINING REALIST AND
MODERNIST ELEMENTS,
SANTA STANDS OUT FOR
DEPICTING THE FRINGES
OF SOCIETY AND
DESPAIRING CHARACTERS.
BY FEATURING A PROSTITUTE
AS PROTAGONIST - ONE WHOM,
NOT INCIDENTALLY, THE
NARRATOR HIMSELF MORALLY
CONDEMNS - GAMBOA
ANTICIPATED THE WORK OF
LATER REALIST WRITERS
SUCH AS MANUEL GALVEZ.
THE OUTPUT OF ARGENTINEAN
WRITER EUGENIO CAMBACERES
DEMONSTRATES THE
NATURALIST'S DESIRE
TO DESCRIBE
OBJECTIVE REALITY
THROUGH THE LENS
OF SCIENTIFIC RIGOR.
IN WORKS SUCH AS
SENTIMENTAL MUSIC,
SIN RUMBO,
AND IN THE BLOOD,
CAMBACERES EXAMINED THE
PROBLEM OF HEREDITY,
A CONCEPT NATURALISM
BORROWED FROM BIOLOGY
AND ELEVATED TO
NEAR DIVINE STATUS.
THE PLOT OF THE NOVEL LAYS
BARE THAT APPROPRIATION
OF CLASS, THAT ARROGANT
APPROPRIATION OF CLASS,
AND YOU SEE NATURALISM
IN THE EXTENT TO WHICH
THE VICES OF THE
HERO ARE CONGENITAL,
THEY ARE IN THE BLOOD.
SIN RUMBO, PUBLISHED IN
1885, TELLS THE STORY
OF ANDRES, AN EDUCATED
RANCHER SUFFERING FROM
ENNUI WHO IS REVIVED
FROM HIS TORPOR,
ALBEIT BRIEFLY,
BY HIS DAUGHTER.
IN THE BLOOD IS A NOVEL
WITH A MORE DEFINED
STRUCTURE, RECOUNTING
ITS HERO GENARO'S
INEXORABLE CLIMB UP
THE SOCIAL LADDER.
WORKING OFF OF THE
NATURALISTIC FASCINATION
WITH INHERITED TRAITS,
THE NOVEL PROMULGATED
A VISION OF GENERATIONAL
DEGRADATION,
BOTH PHYSICAL
AND MORAL.
WITH THIS NOVEL,
CAMBACERES HIGHLIGHTED
A FEAR OF MIXING SOCIAL
STRATA AND PRESENTED THE
LOWER CLASSES AS A DANGER
TO THE PRIVILEGED ELITE.
THUS HE WAS BORN
AND CALLED GENARO.
RUGGED AND RICKETY, HE
GREW AND TURNED FIVE,
WITH THE MARK OF ANAEMIA
IN HIS APPEARANCE,
AND WITH THE YELLOW PALLOR
OF ILL-FED CREATURES.
ONE DAY, HIS FATHER OPENED
WIDE FOR HIM THE DOORS.
THE TIME HAD COME TO
CHARGE WITH INTEREST
FOR HIS REARING, HIS
MOTHER'S SCROFULOUS BOSOM,
AND HIS RATION IN
THE DAILY HODGEPODGE.
AND THEN AND THERE
BEGAN FOR GENARO
THE WANDERING LIFE
OF THE RASCAL,
THE ROVING EXISTENCE
OF THE ROAMER,
WITH NO RESTRAINT
OR CONTROL,
ACCUSTOMED FROM
CHILDHOOD TO ALL THE LOW
AND BRUTAL PERVERSION
OF HIS ENVIRONMENT.
AS THE COMPLEX PROCESS OF
CLAIMING INDEPENDENCE
AND ESTABLISHING
NATIONHOOD UNFOLDED
OVER THE COURSE OF THE
NINETEENTH CENTURY,
THE LITERATURE
OF LATIN AMERICA
USED THE TOOLS AT
HAND TO MAKE SENSE OF
A CONFUSING AND CONSTANTLY
CHANGING WORLD.
THIS WAS A PERIOD IN WHICH
ALLIANCES WERE FORMED
AND IDENTITIES FORGED.
REALISM, ROMANTICISM
AND NATURALISM WERE
INSTRUMENTAL IN THIS
PROCESS OF TRANSFORMATION
AND ALLOWED THE PEOPLE
OF THE CONTINENT
TO SPEAK OF THEIR
CULTURAL UPHEAVAL
IN A VOICE THEY COULD BOTH
COMMAND AND UNDERSTAND.
IN SO DOING, THEY
LAID THE GROUNDWORK
FOR LATIN
AMERICAN IDENTITY
AS IT EXISTS TO
THE PRESENT DAY.
*